add September 2024 `Performance Points & Star Rating Updates` post (#12159)
ppy/osu-wiki: news/2024/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates.md

---
layout: post
title: Performance Points & Star Rating Updates
date: 2024-09-17 12:00 +0000
---

The time for change is finally here!

> ![](/wiki/shared/news/banners/star-rating.jpg)

Reviewer: since last time, new banner designs have been made https://github.com/ppy/osu-wiki/blob/master/wiki/shared/news/banners/pp-sr-osu.jpg

```suggestion
![](/wiki/shared/news/banners/pp-sr-osu.jpg)
```

There are changes to all game modes this time around in an effort to improve the difficulty and performance calculations. This news post will display what has changed in a format that should be understandable to you, the player!

If you find yourself scratching your head when reading, consider consulting the [performance points](/wiki/Performance_points) and [star rating](/wiki/Beatmapping/Star_rating) wiki articles to gain a greater understanding of the topics.

> ## Release Schedule

Reviewer: headings should all be in sentence case

same for text in graphs

> <!-- todo -->

Author: I've left this empty as I'm unsure what it will look like this time around. Likely requires input from @peppy.

> ## osu!catch performance points committee

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's just me, but I feel like we should order rulesets by their ID in this article, ie. bump the "osu! changes" (and taiko) section above this one.

Since the last performance points post, osu!catch has now formed its own Performance Points Committee to help out with osu!catch related changes. You can find out more about the various committees on their [wiki page](/wiki/People/Performance_Points_Committee).

---

## osu! changes

As a reminder of the various core values in the difficulty calculation algorithm:

> - **Aim**: how difficult it is to consistently hit notes back-to-back (affected by approach rate, jumps, Hidden, Hard Rock and more)

Reviewer 2: Are these mentioned anywhere more permanently on the wiki? It feels like we want these definitions to be very front-and-foremost as not even *I* have an amazing concept of them.

Author: They are mentioned on https://osu.ppy.sh/wiki/en/Performance_points#calculation, however looking at it I notice it's slightly outdated (for example, Flashlight is no longer part of Aim calculation)

- **Speed**: how quickly new elements are presented to the player (affected by note density, BPM, Double Time and Half Time)
- **Accuracy**: how difficult it is to stay rhythmically on time (affected by Hidden, Hard Rock, Flashlight and more)
- **Strain**: the difficulty of enduring intense or technically demanding patterns often and for a long time (affected by streams, fast jumps and more)

### Combo scaling removal

> A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/16280) submitted by [moonpoint](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/9558549) with improvements made by [KermitNuggies](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/33452559) has been created in order to remove the combo scaling factor of a score on *both* aim and speed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most monumental [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/16280) proposed by [moonpoint](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/9558549) – with improvements made by [KermitNuggies](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/33452559) – removes the "combo scaling factor" applied to the aim and speed portions of a score's PP.
```

Reviewer 2: The writing style of this whole post needs some serious review so I'll probably stop short here and leave it to @Walavouchey or someone else then revisit after things look better.

This change means a 1 miss score with a max combo of 500 compared to a 1 miss score on the same beatmap with a max combo of 700 will both be punished equally. The miss penalty was also rewritten in order to accomodate these changes - misses have generally been made harsher, with the initial miss having a harsher penalty in order to differentiate between FCs and non-FCs.

The miss penalty scaling is now based on the amount of difficult strains instead of object count. As the penalty is based upon the amount of difficult strains, this means longer maps with a lot of "filler" sections will be punished harder than longer beatmaps which are consistently difficult even if both beatmaps have similar object counts.

> There were concerns raised about consistency being less important with these changes, however this isn't an issue. Using combo as a metric doesn't make much sense as the performance calculator does not know what sections of a beatmap that a score got misses on - as a result, we model any misses as being on the most difficult part.

Reviewer 2: First sentence reads really bad, stops halfway through, weird.

Author: I've tried to improve it by connecting the two, but the sentence might be *too* long now. Open to suggestions on rewording because I can't really think of much.

> ### Sliders in accuracy pp

Reviewer 2: Heading should be better

"Sliders now contribute to accuracy"? dunno

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/27063) submitted by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) has been created to include the slider count in accuracy pp if a score was set using slider head accuracy.

> Accuracy pp uses its own formula to create a separate object count that has always excluded sliders as traditionally, osu! never had accuracy on slider heads. Slider head accuracy is now a possibility in lazer, so accuracy pp has been adjusted to include sliders.

Reviewer 3: probably wanna refer to lazer this way?
```suggestion
Accuracy pp uses its own formula to create a separate object count that has always excluded sliders as traditionally, osu! never had accuracy on slider heads. Slider head accuracy is now a possibility in osu!(lazer), so accuracy pp has been adjusted to include sliders.
```

This change may not affect all scores set with slider head accuracy, as accuracy pp also has an object count cap meaning accuracy pp will go unchanged if the hit circle object count was already hitting this cap. Additionally, very low accuracy scores may not be boosted enough by the added object counts to result in any extra reward.

This is one change related to slider head accuracy with more to be expected in the future.

### Minor Changes

> - A [slider mechanic change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/24966) was made to adjust slider ends to be more lenient during fast sliders which has resulted in buffs on some maps with very fast sliders such as [KAEDE](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/660630#osu/1398809). You can find more about this change in the related [lazer updates video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SlWKKA-ltZY).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A [slider mechanic change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/24966) was made to adjust slider ends to be more lenient during fast sliders which has resulted in buffs on some maps with very fast sliders such as [KAEDE](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/660630#osu/1398809). You can find more about this change in the related [osu!(lazer) updates video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SlWKKA-ltZY).
```

- Some various refactorings across difficulty calculation and performance calculation submitted by [Givikap120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705) to reduce duplication. [#1](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29293) [#2](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29294) [#3](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29292) [#4](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29291)

## osu!taiko changes

In order to aid understanding of the changes to osu!taiko, these are the skills in difficulty calculation which will be referenced throughout:

- **Stamina**: the speed at which you hit notes, based on an assumed finger count of 2 per colour
- **Colour**: the frequency of which the beatmap changes between a don or kat
- **Rhythm**: the complexity of the beatmap's rhythm in relation to notes' independent rhythm ratios

### Consideration for TL tapping in the stamina component of difficulty calculation

With the recent update to osu!taiko's difficulty calculation, an issue has arisen concerning a unique playstyle known as TL-tapping. [Maxie's video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WM7gkFBDl9s) provides a more in-depth explanation of this playstyle.

> A recent [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/20558) by [vun](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6932501) addresses these issues within the stamina system.  When the new stamina system for osu!taiko was introduced in 2022, it assumed that players used two fingers per colour, leading to some impressive plays by players like [Ney](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/5991961) on [Alive](https://osu.ppy.sh/scores/1873110816) and others on [StrangeProgram](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/5774#taiko/28065), which became notorious for yielding some speedy high PP scores.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A recent [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/20558) by [vun](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6932501) addresses these issues within the stamina system.  When the new stamina system for osu!taiko was introduced in 2022, it assumed that players used two fingers per colour, leading to some impressive plays by players like [Ney](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/5991961) on [Alive](https://osu.ppy.sh/scores/1873110816) and others on [StrangeProgram](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/5774#taiko/28065), which became notorious for yielding some speedy high PP scores.
```

> The new system, while simple in its implementation, introduces variable finger counts for stamina. Mono-colour patterns that last more than 300ms without a colour change are now considered to have a four fingers avaiable. This adjustment significantly nerfs certain maps and converts.  Additionally, convert-specific nerfs have been removed from difficulty calculations to ensure that converts are weighted fairly against mode-specific maps. The changes to finger count availability also ensure that more *niche* skill sets are fairly represented.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The new system, while simple in its implementation, introduces variable finger counts for stamina. Mono-colour patterns that last more than 300ms without a colour change are now considered to have four fingers available. This adjustment significantly nerfs certain maps and converts. Additionally, convert-specific nerfs have been removed from difficulty calculations to ensure that converts are weighted fairly against mode-specific maps. The changes to finger count availability also ensure that more *niche* skill sets are fairly represented.
```

### Changes to the HDFL bonus in the accuracy component of performance calculation

On the performance points side, a change by [-Lawtron-](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11475208) addresses the bonus applied to memorisation mods on shorter maps. The length of the map will no longer affect the base multiplier in the accuracy component of the performance points system. However, the cap for HDFL (Hidden + Flashlight) bonuses has been increased to 1.1x for qualifying plays.

Previously, a map with just one object could receive the same bonus as a map with 1,000 objects when using HDFL, which led to disproportionate rewards for shorter, simpler maps.

### Adjusted accuracy scaling

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/20963) submitted by [Natelytle](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/17607667) has been made to the way osu!taiko calculates accuracy difficulty, to keep accuracy and difficulty scaling values more in line for the same score as you change the overall difficulty of the map.

> The current way accuracy scaling works in osu!taiko is very simple. It take the decimal accuracy of the score, raises it to the power of 15, and multiplies the result by a constant determined by the overall difficulty. The problem with this is that if you keep the spread of your hit timings (also known as UR) the same, your accuracy does not decrease at a constant rate as you increase the overall difficulty.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The current way accuracy scaling works in osu!taiko is very simple. It takes the decimal accuracy of the score, raises it to the power of 15, and multiplies the result by a constant determined by the overall difficulty. The problem with this is that if you keep the spread of your hit timings (also known as UR) the same, your accuracy does not decrease at a constant rate as you increase the overall difficulty.
```

The consequence of this is that if you take the same score and increase the overall difficulty on it, eventually you will reach a point where the accuracy drops off faster than the constant bonus for OD increases. This means the exact same score can *lose* pp if the overall difficulty is too high.

![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/old-taiko-accuracy-curve.png)

> To solve this, we can leverage the fact that tapping error is almost always normally distributed. To do this, we use a formula that takes the proportion of hits outside of a boundary, like the 300 hit window, and returns the width of a normal distribution that would result in that proportion. This is used to solve for the unstable rate of the score using the 100 and miss counts, and use that to scale a single maximum accuracy value of the score instead, doing away with the constant bonuses for overall difficulty entirely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To solve this, we can leverage the fact that tapping error is almost always normally distributed. To do this, we use a formula that takes the proportion of hits outside a boundary, like the 300 hit window, and returns the width of a normal distribution that would result in that proportion. This is used to solve for the unstable rate of the score using the 100 and miss counts, and use that to scale a single maximum accuracy value of the score instead, doing away with the constant bonuses for overall difficulty entirely.
```

![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/new-taiko-accuracy-curve.png)

### Minor changes

- [Refactor](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/28596) of Taiko's skill code by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) to make calculations more maintainable.

On a side note, the osu!taiko performance points committee is aware of the feedback, both positive and negative, surrounding the new system over the past couple of years. We value the community's input and are continuously working to improve. There are significant changes on the horizon, such as the introduction of the pattern skill (rhythm within colour, and colour within rhythm) as well as performance-related changes. If you’d like to contribute to future changes, feel free to join the discussion on our [Performance Points Discord server](https://discord.gg/aqPCnXu).

> ## osu!catch changes

Reviewer 2: Don't need to put "changes" on the end of every heading, it's implicit.

- New value: 1.0x base with -0.02x applied for each miss to a maximum reduction of 0.9x
- Old value: 0.9x (always)

This prevents FC plays with the No Fail mod from being punished and reduces the ability for No Fail to be used in order to "sandbag" or derank.

### Minor Changes

- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/28337) submitted by [spaceman_atlas](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/3035836) to remove rounding of the slider velocity multiplier on juice streams which resulted in some shifting of difficulty & performance values.

## osu!mania changes

### Adjusted LN value scaling to address overweighted LN maps

A [slight adjustment](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/24109) to LN values submitted by [Hydria](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/808176) has been made to difficulty calculation in an effort to bring overweighted LN maps to more acceptable values. Most LN patterns are nerfed as a result of this change.

There are 2 particular changes to LN-specific bonuses that have resulted in this nerf:

> - There is an overlap bonus which awards a bonus if 2 LNs overlap eachother - the larger the overlap, the larger the bonus. This has been adjusted to require larger overlaps for the equivalent bonuses.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- There is an overlap bonus which awards a bonus if 2 LNs overlap each other — the larger the overlap, the larger the bonus. This has been adjusted to require larger overlaps for the equivalent bonuses.
```

The miss penalty scaling is now based on the amount of difficult strains instead of object count. As the penalty is based upon the amount of difficult strains, this means longer maps with a lot of "filler" sections will be punished harder than longer beatmaps which are consistently difficult even if both beatmaps have similar object counts.

There were concerns raised about consistency being less important with these changes as combo is no longer a factor, however this isn't an issue - using combo as a metric doesn't make much sense as the performance calculator does not know what sections of a beatmap that a score got misses on. As a result, we model any misses as being on the most difficult part.

### Rhythm complexity improvements

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/28871) proposed by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) fixes some flaws in the rhythm complexity calculations.

> As a reminder of how rhythm works, notes are grouped into 'islands'  (for example, a triple pattern is described as a 3 note island) and complexity is assessed using these islands.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As a reminder of how rhythm works, notes are grouped into 'islands' (for example, a triple pattern is described as a 3 note island) and complexity is assessed using these islands.
```

- Some various refactorings across difficulty calculation and performance calculation submitted by [Givikap120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705) to reduce duplication. [#1](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29293) [#2](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29294) [#3](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29292) [#4](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29291)

## osu!taiko

In order to aid understanding of the changes to osu!taiko, these are the skills in difficulty calculation which will be referenced throughout:

- **Stamina**: the speed at which you hit notes, based on an assumed finger count of 2 per colour
- **Colour**: the frequency of which the beatmap changes between a don or kat
- **Rhythm**: the complexity of the beatmap's rhythm in relation to notes' independent rhythm ratios

### Consideration for TL tapping in the stamina component of difficulty calculation

With the recent update to osu!taiko's difficulty calculation, an issue has arisen concerning a unique playstyle known as TL-tapping. [Maxie's video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WM7gkFBDl9s) provides a more in-depth explanation of this playstyle.

> A recent [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/20558) by [vun](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6932501) addresses these issues within the stamina system.  When the new stamina system for osu!taiko was introduced in 2022, it assumed that players used two fingers per colour, leading to some impressive plays by players like [Ney](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/5991961) on [Alive](https://osu.ppy.sh/scores/1873110816) and others on [StrangeProgram](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/5774#taiko/28065), which became notorious for yielding some speedy high PP scores.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A recent [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/20558) by [vun](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6932501) addresses these issues within the stamina system. When the new stamina system for osu!taiko was introduced in 2022, it assumed that players used two fingers per colour, leading to some impressive plays by players like [Ney](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/5991961) on [Alive](https://osu.ppy.sh/scores/1873110816) and others on [StrangeProgram](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/5774#taiko/28065), which became notorious for yielding some speedy high PP scores.
```

## Release schedule

<!-- todo -->

---

## osu!

As a reminder of the various core values in the difficulty calculation algorithm:

- **Aim**: how difficult it is to consistently hit notes back-to-back (affected by approach rate, jumps, Hidden, Hard Rock and more)
- **Speed**: how quickly new elements are presented to the player (affected by note density, BPM, Double Time and Half Time)
- **Accuracy**: how difficult it is to stay rhythmically on time (affected by Hidden, Hard Rock, Flashlight and more)
- **Strain**: the difficulty of enduring intense or technically demanding patterns often and for a long time (affected by streams, fast jumps and more)

### Combo scaling removal

The most monumental [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/16280) proposed by [moonpoint](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/9558549) – with improvements made by [KermitNuggies](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/33452559) – removes the "combo scaling factor" applied to the aim and speed portions of a score's PP.

> This change means a 1 miss score with a max combo of 500 compared to a 1 miss score on the same beatmap with a max combo of 700 will both be punished equally. The miss penalty was also rewritten in order to accommodate these changes - misses have generally been made harsher, with the initial miss having a harsher penalty in order to differentiate between FCs and non-FCs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This change means a 1 miss score with a max combo of 500 compared to a 1 miss score with a max combo of 700 on the same beatmap will be punished equally. The miss penalty was also rewritten in order to accommodate these changes - misses have generally been made harsher, with the initial miss having a harsher penalty in order to differentiate between FCs and non-FCs.
```

### Rhythm complexity improvements

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/28871) proposed by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) fixes some flaws in the rhythm complexity calculations.

As a reminder of how rhythm works, notes are grouped into 'islands' (for example, a triple pattern is described as a 3 note island) and complexity is assessed using these islands.

The first improvement in this change is removing a size bonus on island length and uncapping the island size. Previously, there was a bonus applied based on island length sizes that would cause long bursts to gain a lot of rhythm complexity even if they were not complex.

The second improvement in this change heavily nerfs repeated islands. This causes maps which abuse the spamming of triples to increase pp (one example is [SLoWMoTIoN](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/295848#osu/988793)) to have a considerable nerf:

![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/island-repetition-nerf.png)

> The third improvement in this change is a general buff to the initial rhythm bonus. This helps maps with high rhythm complexity such as [Asteroid Field of DECAPLETS](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/1666685#osu/3403124) to gain a small bonus.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The third improvement in this change is a general buff to the initial rhythm bonus. This helps maps with high rhythm complexity such as [Asteroid Field of DECAPLETS](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/1666685#osu/3403124).
```

> The final improvement in this change is a nerf to rhythm complexity based on how "doubletappable" an island is. "doubletapness" is assessed by comparing the 300 hit window size to the time between the current and previous object and deciding if the player has enough time to comfortably double-tap. This doubletap nerf already existed in speed, with this change now bringing it over to rhythm complexity too.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The final improvement in this change is a nerf to rhythm complexity based on how "doubletappable" an island is. "doubletapness" is assessed by comparing the 300 hit window size to the time between the current and previous object and deciding if the player has enough time to comfortably double-tap. This doubletap nerf already existed in speed, and this change now brings it over to rhythm complexity too.
```

### Speed distance hotfix

> A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29980) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) was created to hotfix the speed distance bonus.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29980) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) hotfixes the speed distance bonus.
```

> The distance bonus exists to reward flow aim by multiplying it onto the speed difficulty. In this hotfix, rather than the bonuses being multiplicative they have been changed to be additive to overall decrease the effect the distance bonus has on the speed value.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The distance bonus exists to reward flow aim by multiplying it with the speed difficulty. In this hotfix, rather than the bonuses being multiplicative, they have been changed to be additive to decrease the effect the distance bonus has on the speed value.
```

> Alongside this, the distance bonus has a change in scaling that results in lower spacing flow aim to be less rewarded.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In addition, the distance bonus scaling has been changed to decrease the reward for lower spacing flow aim.
```

![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/distance-bonus.png)

Finally, a new multiplier was added to the final result of the distance bonus to decrease it overall.

### Sliders now contribute to accuracy pp

> A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/27063) submitted by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) has been created to include the slider count in accuracy pp if a score was set using slider head accuracy.

Reviewer 5: this uses "submitted", others use "proposed". I don't really care what gets used but the introduction format should be either 100% consistent or 100% varied (for flavor, think eph flowery language newsposts), not inbetween.

> Accuracy pp uses its own formula to create a separate object count that has always excluded sliders as traditionally, osu! never had accuracy on slider heads. Slider head accuracy is now a possibility in osu!(lazer), so accuracy pp has been adjusted to include sliders.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Traditionally, osu! has not had accuracy on slider heads, and so Accuracy pp traditionally excludes sliders in its calculation. However, osu!(lazer) has slider head accuracy, and so Accuracy pp now includes sliders.
```

Author: this is better but I realise this is missing clarification that it'll only include sliders if you're playing with slider head accuracy

Author: fixed in https://github.com/ppy/osu-wiki/pull/12159/commits/35f30dba96b813c58be1c4364103732d64a4c3dd

This change may not affect all scores set with slider head accuracy, as accuracy pp also has an object count cap meaning accuracy pp will go unchanged if the hit circle object count was already hitting this cap. Additionally, very low accuracy scores may not be boosted enough by the added object counts to result in any extra reward.

> This is one change related to slider head accuracy with more to be expected in the future.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We expect more pp changes related to slider head accuracy in the future!
```

- Repeated note groups have been heavily nerfed. This practically means that patterns such as repeated triple spam (like in [nameless - SLoWMoTIoN](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/295848#osu/988793)) are nerfed significantly:

![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/island-repetition-nerf.png)

### Speed distance hotfix

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29980) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) brings a minor change to a bonus applied for speed distance bonus.

The distance bonus exists to reward flow aim by multiplying it with the speed difficulty. In this hotfix, rather than the bonuses being multiplicative, they have been changed to be additive to decrease the effect the distance bonus has on the speed value.

In addition, the distance bonus scaling has been changed to decrease the reward for lower-spacing flow aim. Finally, a new multiplier was added to the final result of the distance bonus to decrease it overall.

> ![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/distance-bonus.png)

Reviewer: wouldn't it be way better to illustrate the [multiplicative-to-additive change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29980/files#diff-63100aca8fa85bf402677740e45b3fc1ab11c505357c859740bf591b35cacf98L70-R71) in graph form than the [change to the distance multiplier](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29980/files#diff-63100aca8fa85bf402677740e45b3fc1ab11c505357c859740bf591b35cacf98L66-R68)? isn't it way more of an impactful change?

Reviewer: in that case i'd leave the graph out completely. showing that the "low ar distance bonus" is halved (appearance-wise, because the y axis starts at 0.25 or smth) gives no better intuition than the text description since the changes aren't in terms of actual pp values

Author: hm, I was thinking with the circle distance being the x-axis that it would give a good understanding of how the distance bonus scales even if that doesn't necessarily translate to pp directly - is it not intuitive to look at the graph and think "flow aim that is smaller than *x* circles distance is going to give a smaller bonus than before"? it just seems like a visualization of the explanation to me. the issue with the additive change was that you don't get this same intuition imo

Reviewer: the graph shows two minimally adjusted curves that *do* need explanation, but what it's depicting is just a small part in the equation that i think is explained well enough in the revised text i suggested. it depicts a change in the code really, not what its effects are (i certainly didn't have a clue what the graph was about before reading the code)

will people think it's a small adjustment because of the small visual difference between the curves? will people think the pp for low spacing is halved since the y axis misleadingly starts at 0.25? will people understand how much and in what cases this "multiplier" affects things anyway? will people understand that the graph only depicts the second, smaller change in the first place? the circle distance thing on the x axis might be understandable to a larger proportion of readers, but the rest isn't

"lower-spacing fast flow aim is nerfed" is just about what needs to be conveyed for the `distanceBonus` change, and in general the combined effect is a sizeable nerf to flow aim for speed players - [pishi's video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kqu4TUOO5IY&t=155s) explains this well, doesn't it?

a good way to show the effects of the pr in question might be to mention which maps get the largest change in pp and by how much (we have [spreadsheets for this](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29980#issuecomment-2396025182) don't we). something like "most of the affected >1k pp plays lose about 40 to 70 pp from this change". maybe graphing this spreadsheet would be a better idea

Author: in the past we've given some examples of SR/PP changes on some maps that were effected by changes, I'll do the same here and remove the distance bonus graph

> ### Speed distance hotfix
> 
> A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29980) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) brings a minor change to a bonus applied for speed distance bonus.
> 
> The distance bonus exists to reward flow aim by multiplying it with the speed difficulty. In this hotfix, rather than the bonuses being multiplicative, they have been changed to be additive to decrease the effect the distance bonus has on the speed value.
> 
> In addition, the distance bonus scaling has been changed to decrease the reward for lower-spacing flow aim. Finally, a new multiplier was added to the final result of the distance bonus to decrease it overall.
> 
> ![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/distance-bonus.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Flow aim hotfix

Fast flow aim (more than 200 BPM) is rewarded by taking into account the distance between objects and the general speed difficulty. These values used to be multipliers, but they're now additive instead. In effect, this nerfs fast spaced streams significantly.

The same [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29980) by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) additionally performs other minor changes to how these values are calculated, lowering them overall, especially for lower-spaced flow aim.
```

Author: Not a fan of that first sentence. It's true that the actual speed bonus is only applied at BPMs >= 200, but the distance bonus is a separate thing that applies regardless of the BPM. The actual speed bonus is also not about flow aim, while the distance bonus is. I think it would be better to remove the BPM mention entirely

Reviewer: ty for clarifying, i've edited it out

- An [aim skill multiplier rebalance](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29998) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) was made in order to ensure the final results of all major changes are in line with expectations.
- A [speed accuracy scaling change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/30088) proposed by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) was made to punish lower accuracies below OD 8 more harshly.
- [Finadoggie](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/14182048)'s proposed [score statistics estimation change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/27691) was made to ensure that slider breaks and dropped slider ends are correctly accounted for in osu!(lazer) scores.

## osu!taiko

In order to aid understanding of the changes to osu!taiko, these are the skills in difficulty calculation which will be referenced throughout:

- **Stamina**: the speed at which you hit notes, based on an assumed finger count of 2 per colour
- **Colour**: the frequency of which the beatmap changes between a don or kat
- **Rhythm**: the complexity of the beatmap's rhythm in relation to notes' independent rhythm ratios

### Consideration for TL tapping in the stamina component of difficulty calculation

> With the recent update to osu!taiko's difficulty calculation, an issue has arisen concerning a unique playstyle known as TL-tapping. [Maxie's video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WM7gkFBDl9s) provides a more in-depth explanation of this playstyle.

Reviewer: >  With the recent update to osu!taiko's difficulty calculation

what is this referring to?

Author: Pretty sure this is referring to https://osu.ppy.sh/home/news/2022-09-28-changes-to-osu-taiko-sr-and-pp. I think I just overlooked that part when taking it from taiko committee

A recent [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/20558) by [vun](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6932501) addresses these issues within the stamina system. When the new stamina system for osu!taiko was introduced in 2022, it assumed that players used two fingers per colour, leading to some impressive plays by players like [Ney](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/5991961) on [Alive](https://osu.ppy.sh/scores/1873110816) and others on [StrangeProgram](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/5774#taiko/28065), which became notorious for yielding some speedy high PP scores.

> The new system, while simple in its implementation, introduces variable finger counts for stamina. Mono-colour patterns that last more than 300ms without a colour change are now considered to have four fingers available. This adjustment significantly nerfs certain maps and converts. Additionally, convert-specific nerfs have been removed from difficulty calculations to ensure that converts are weighted fairly against mode-specific maps. The changes to finger count availability also ensure that more *niche* skill sets are fairly represented.

Reviewer: what "niche" skill sets? is it just the aforementioned tl-tapping method?

Author: @Lawtrohux

Reviewer 6: not ltca but i think the intention was to include other playstyles which may use 3 or 4 fingers per color in the phrasing, nothing specific

Author: could we then reword to something along the lines of `The changes to finger count availability also ensure that play styles using varying amounts of fingers per colour are fairly represented`?

Reviewer 6: i say go for it

Reviewer 7: yeah that sounds fine to me. essentially yes its skillsets that utilise more than the set 2 finger count

Author: 8446862a37994c10146eefb78835d72feb646b0f

## Release schedule

<!-- todo -->

---

## osu!

All changes for osu! are covered in the osu!(lazer) update video, which you may be interested in watching:

<div align="center">
    <iframe width="95%" style="aspect-ratio: 16 / 9;" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Kqu4TUOO5IY" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

As a reminder of the various core values in the difficulty calculation algorithm:

- **Aim**: how difficult it is to consistently hit notes back-to-back (affected by approach rate, jumps, Hidden, Hard Rock and more)
- **Speed**: how quickly new elements are presented to the player (affected by note density, BPM, Double Time and Half Time)
- **Accuracy**: how difficult it is to stay rhythmically on time (affected by Hidden, Hard Rock, Flashlight and more)
- **Strain**: the difficulty of enduring intense or technically demanding patterns often and for a long time (affected by streams, fast jumps and more)

### Combo scaling removal

> The most monumental [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/16280) proposed by [moonpoint](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/9558549) – with improvements made by [KermitNuggies](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/33452559) – removes the "combo scaling factor" applied to the aim and speed portions of a score's PP.

Reviewer 3: "pp" should probably be lowercase as its written like that on the performance points wiki page and i dont think the community uses it in uppercase
```suggestion
The most monumental [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/16280) proposed by [moonpoint](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/9558549) – with improvements made by [KermitNuggies](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/33452559) – removes the "combo scaling factor" applied to the aim and speed portions of a score's pp.
```

> This change means a 1 miss score with a max combo of 500 compared to a 1 miss score with a max combo of 700 on the same beatmap will be punished equally. The miss penalty was also rewritten in order to accommodate these changes - misses have generally been made harsher, with the initial miss having a harsher penalty in order to differentiate between FCs and non-FCs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This change means a 1 miss score with a max combo of 500 compared to a 1 miss score with a max combo of 700 on the same beatmap will be punished equally. The miss penalty was also rewritten in order to accommodate these changes — misses have generally been made harsher, with the initial miss having a harsher penalty in order to differentiate between FCs and non-FCs.
```

The miss penalty scaling is now based on the amount of difficult strains instead of object count. As the penalty is based upon the amount of difficult strains, this means longer maps with a lot of "filler" sections will be punished harder than longer beatmaps which are consistently difficult even if both beatmaps have similar object counts.

There were concerns raised about consistency being less important with these changes as combo is no longer a factor, however this isn't an issue - using combo as a metric doesn't make much sense as the performance calculator does not know what sections of a beatmap that a score got misses on. As a result, we model any misses as being on the most difficult part.

### Rhythm complexity improvements

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/28871) proposed by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) fixes some flaws in the rhythm complexity calculations.

> As a reminder of how rhythm works, notes are grouped into 'islands' (for example, a triple pattern is described as a 3 note island) and complexity is assessed using these islands.

Reviewer 3: i dont think the general community members knows how rhythm works at all so i wouldnt call this a reminder:

```suggestion
If you don't know how rhythm works inside of the pp formula, notes are grouped into "islands" (for example, a triple pattern is described as a 3 note island) and complexity is assessed using these islands.
```

also same feedback applies to this regarding my upcoming comment regarding "islands"

Author: "reminder" was chosen as islands were explained when rhythm was first added, but it's probably better to introduce the concept entirely

> The first improvement in this change is removing a size bonus on island length and uncapping the island size. Previously, there was a bonus applied based on island length sizes that would cause long bursts to gain a lot of rhythm complexity even if they were not complex.

Reviewer 3: this entire paragraph also seems very complex reading it as someone who's not a dev/familiar with the relevant formulas, also you introduce island "length" and "size" as two separate parameters then you mush them together the very next sentence:
`[...]island length and uncapping the island size.`
`[...]island length sizes[...]`

...that made me even more confused, so i would suggest maybe dumbing this entire portion down, rewording "islands" into "bursts" would make this a lot more comprehensible to the average reader (if applicable)

Author: bursts is not really fair, because it is grouping patterns together that might not necessarily be bursts. I think island is the right word (it's also the word the pp system uses). I'm not really sure what to do with this?

Reviewer 3: i'd argue that how its referred to in the pp system isnt relevant to the end-user, for me personally when i just swapped the word islands with bursts the whole paragraph made a lot more sense, but i understand that *technically* it isnt the correct term

an argument could be made that despite the actual term being used it might be better to dumb it down to something more easily understandable for the general audience, especially since the term "island" is completely foreign to the general public

Author: i'm fine dumbing it down, i just think using a word like "burst" might cause more confusion because it's a grouping of patterns - could even be a jump for example

Reviewer 3: that's ok, you dont have to use that exact wording, let me know when you draft something up in the discord and ill take a look

Reviewer 8: tbf the original newspost explaining the rhythm system used `islands` as well https://github.com/ppy/osu-wiki/blob/master/news/2021/2021-11-09-performance-points-star-rating-updates.md#rhythm-complexity

Reviewer 3: in that case using that word is fine, and after sleeping over it maybe the same explanation as that post can be used (the three bullet points), then go into what's been changed

Author: I've re-used the explanation from that previous post about islands instead of what I had before

The second improvement in this change heavily nerfs repeated islands. This causes maps which abuse the spamming of triples to increase pp (one example is [SLoWMoTIoN](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/295848#osu/988793)) to have a considerable nerf:

![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/island-repetition-nerf.png)

The third improvement in this change is a general buff to the initial rhythm bonus. This helps maps with high rhythm complexity such as [Asteroid Field of DECAPLETS](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/1666685#osu/3403124).

> The final improvement in this change is a nerf to rhythm complexity based on how "doubletappable" an island is. "doubletapness" is assessed by comparing the 300 hit window size to the time between the current and previous object and deciding if the player has enough time to comfortably double-tap. This doubletap nerf already existed in speed, and this change now brings it over to rhythm complexity too.

Reviewer 3: `doubletap`, `double-tap` and `double tap` are all [valid ways to write this word](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/double_tap) but i felt like it looked weird without a hyphen, subjective
```suggestion
The final improvement in this change is a nerf to rhythm complexity based on how "double-tappable" an island is. "Double-tapness" is assessed by comparing the 300 hit window size to the time between the current and previous object and deciding if the player has enough time to comfortably double-tap. This double-tap nerf already existed in speed, and this change now brings it over to rhythm complexity too.
```

> ### Speed distance hotfix

Reviewer 3: i dont feel like referring to this as a "hotfix" is valid since the "fix" is being applied inside a normal deployment/update cycle, feel free to correct me though
also maybe it should be mentioned what part of "skill set" is being affected by this in the heading (subjective), not sure if "speed distance" is a valid way to describe this but all of this is just community-made jargon anyway so should be fine

```suggestion
### Flow aim speed & distance multiplier fix
```

Author: the actual rework was labelled as a hotfix as well, mostly because it's not really resolving the larger issue surrounding but slightly improving

adjusting the header to be correct while also explaining the skill-set is kind of difficult to not make weird, there's a reason why it explains what "speed distance" even means. it affects flow aim in some cases and not in others, it affects speed flow in most cases. i feel like trying to explain the effect in the title is doing *too* much

> A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29980) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) hotfixes the speed distance bonus.

Reviewer 3: if you think the above feedback is valid feel free to apply or reword
```suggestion
A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29980) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) fixes the flow aim speed distance bonus.
```

Author: see above comment, applies the same here

The distance bonus exists to reward flow aim by multiplying it with the speed difficulty. In this hotfix, rather than the bonuses being multiplicative, they have been changed to be additive to decrease the effect the distance bonus has on the speed value.

In addition, the distance bonus scaling has been changed to decrease the reward for lower spacing flow aim.

![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/distance-bonus.png)

> Finally, a new multiplier was added to the final result of the distance bonus to decrease it overall.

Reviewer 3: this sentence feels out of place in between a heading and the graph, would you consider moving it before the graph?

### Sliders now contribute to accuracy pp

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/27063) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) has been created to include the slider count in accuracy pp if a score was set using slider head accuracy.

> Traditionally, osu! has not had accuracy on slider heads, and so Accuracy pp traditionally excludes sliders in its calculation. However, osu!(lazer) has slider head accuracy, and so Accuracy pp now includes sliders on scores played with slider head accuracy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Traditionally, osu! has not had accuracy on slider heads, and so accuracy pp traditionally excludes sliders in its calculation. However, osu!(lazer) has slider head accuracy, and so accuracy pp now includes sliders on scores played with slider head accuracy.
```

> This change may not affect all scores set with slider head accuracy, as accuracy pp also has an object count cap meaning accuracy pp will go unchanged if the hit circle object count was already hitting this cap. Additionally, very low accuracy scores may not be boosted enough by the added object counts to result in any extra reward.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This change may not affect all scores set with slider head accuracy, as accuracy pp also has an object count cap, meaning accuracy pp will go unchanged if the cap was already reached. Additionally, very low accuracy scores may not be boosted enough by the added object counts to result in any extra reward.
```

- Some various refactorings across difficulty calculation and performance calculation proposed by [Givikap120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705) to reduce duplication. [#1](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29293) [#2](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29294) [#3](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29292) [#4](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29291)
- An [aim skill multiplier rebalance](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/29998) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) was made in order to ensure the final results of all major changes are in line with expectations.
- A [speed accuracy scaling change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/30088) proposed by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) was made to uncap OD scaling on speed as it would never account for ODs lower than 8 when punishing low accuracy.

> - A [score statistics estimation change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/27691) proposed by [Finadoggie](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/14182048) was made to ensure that sliderbreaks and dropped slider ends are correctly accounted for on osu!(lazer) scores.

Reviewer 3: cutting down on the amount a bullet point starts with `A`
```suggestion
- [Finadoggie](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/14182048)'s proposed [score statistics estimation change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/27691) was made to ensure that slider breaks and dropped slider ends are correctly accounted for on osu!(lazer) scores.
```

The consequence of this is that if you take the same score and increase the overall difficulty on it, eventually you will reach a point where the accuracy drops off faster than the constant bonus for OD increases. This means the exact same score can *lose* pp if the overall difficulty is too high.

![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/old-taiko-accuracy-curve.png)

To solve this, we can leverage the fact that tapping error is almost always normally distributed. To do this, we use a formula that takes the proportion of hits outside a boundary, like the 300 hit window, and returns the width of a normal distribution that would result in that proportion. This is used to solve for the unstable rate of the score using the 100 and miss counts, and use that to scale a single maximum accuracy value of the score instead, doing away with the constant bonuses for overall difficulty entirely.

![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/new-taiko-accuracy-curve.png)

### Minor changes

> - [Refactor](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/28596) of Taiko's skill code by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) to make calculations more maintainable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Refactor](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/28596) of osu!taiko's skill code by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) to make calculations more maintainable.
```

Since the last performance points post, osu!catch has now formed its own Performance Points Committee to help out with osu!catch related changes. You can find out more about the various committees on their [wiki page](/wiki/People/Performance_Points_Committee).

### No fail changes

All the way back in 2021 the osu! mode received no fail changes to scale the no fail pp multiplier based on the number of misses. As suggested by [Givikap120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705), these changes [were brought into osu!catch too](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/28353):

- Old value: 0.9x (always)
- New value: 1.0x base with -0.02x applied for each miss to a maximum reduction of 0.9x

This prevents FC plays with the No Fail mod from being punished and reduces the ability for No Fail to be used in order to "sandbag" or derank.

### Minor changes

- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/28337) proposed by [spaceman_atlas](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/3035836) to remove rounding of the slider velocity multiplier on juice streams which resulted in some shifting of difficulty & performance values.

## osu!mania

### Adjusted LN value scaling to address overweighted LN maps

> A [slight adjustment](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/24109) to LN values proposed by [Hydria](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/808176) has been made to difficulty calculation in an effort to bring overweighted LN maps to more acceptable values. Most LN patterns are nerfed as a result of this change.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A [slight adjustment](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/24109) to LN values proposed by [Hydria](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/808176) has been made to the difficulty calculation in an effort to bring overweighted LN maps to more acceptable values. Most LN patterns are nerfed as a result of this change.
```

There are 2 particular changes to LN-specific bonuses that have resulted in this nerf:

- There is an overlap bonus which awards a bonus if 2 LNs overlap each other — the larger the overlap, the larger the bonus. This has been adjusted to require larger overlaps for the equivalent bonuses.
- Cases where 2 LNs start together (for example, in a chord) are no longer buffed.

Here is a graph to help visualise the LN overlap bonus change:

![](/wiki/shared/news/2024-09-17-performance-points-star-rating-updates/hold-overlap-bonuses.png)

To add context to the graph, 30ms corresponds to 250bpm 1/8th patterns.

> In the [previous osu!mania changes](https://osu.ppy.sh/home/news/2022-10-09-changes-to-osu-mania-sr-and-pp), there was a fix for the ends of LNs and note chords awarding varying amounts of difficulty depending on their placement order. These changes have improved on that once again, and the order of LN chord starts no longer vary difficulty either - this means that the placement order of chords should no longer matter at all.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the [previous osu!mania changes](https://osu.ppy.sh/home/news/2022-10-09-changes-to-osu-mania-sr-and-pp), there was a fix for the ends of LNs and note chords awarding varying amounts of difficulty depending on their placement order. These changes have improved on that once again, and the order of LN chord starts no longer vary difficulty either — this means that the placement order of chords should no longer matter at all.
```

---

> A huge thanks to the contributors of these changes as well as the community of people who helped by providing their feedback. If you'd like to learn more about the development of performance points, you may want to take a look in the `#difficulty-osu` channel of the [osu! Discord server](https://discord.gg/ppy) or even join the [Performance Points Discord server](https://discord.gg/aqPCnXu) dedicated to developing and discussing performance points.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A huge thanks to the contributors of these changes as well as the community of people who helped by providing their feedback. If you'd like to learn more about the development of performance points, you may want to take a look in the `#difficulty-osu` channel of the [osu! Discord server](https://discord.gg/ppy), or even join the [Performance Points Discord server](https://discord.gg/aqPCnXu) dedicated to developing and discussing performance points.
```
